# Course: Mastering RTOS: Hands on FreeRTOS and STM32Fx with Debugging

Notes and Code Author: Leandro D. Medus  
August 2021

## Ch6. Creating FreeRTOS based project for STM32 MCUs

### 6.1

system workbench for STM32 from AC6 tools

This is a tool based on eclipse but the the problem is that it doesn't support all the nucleo boards and new STM series like STM32L5.


In case you are using this tool becuase your board is supported, in new project select:
* Executable > Ac6 STM32 MCU Project

This will load al the toolchain and the proper configuration of the device.

Select: 
* Standard Peripheral Library (StdPeriph)
* Download Firmware: 'STM32F4XX_DSP_StdPeriph_Lib_V1.8.0' (example for the selected family)

 
### 6.3 including the FreeRTOS code

In the project directory
* Third-Party
    * FreeRTOS
        * org
            > here copy the source and License of FreeRTOS sources (kernel)

```
D:\Repos\courses\fastbit_freertos\drivers\FreeRTOSv202107.00\FreeRTOS\Source   

D:\Repos\courses\fastbit_freertos\drivers\FreeRTOSv202012.01-LTS\FreeRTOS-LTS\FreeRTOS\FreeRTOS-Kernel
```

Inside the folder source, the only thing that we can delete because we are not using some libraries is inside **portable**.  
Keep:
* GGC (only ARM_CM4F/ARM_CM33)
* MemMang (memory management)  (only heap_4.c)

Inside GCC keep only the directory of your own architecture

In MemMang I only kept heap_4.c for this projects. (memory allocation schemes)


### 6.4 including the freertos code in the project

in the eclipse project just refresh to see the folder Third-Party.

* Select the folder **Third-Party** and go to properties.  
* In **C/C++ Build** uncheck **Exclude resource for build**

#### Include the headers file

Important: **Subsection GCC Compiler**

ProjectName > Properties > C/C++ Build > Settings > MCU GCC Compiler > Includes
* Add > Select workspace > Select: 
    * Third-Party > org > source > include 
* Add > Select workspace > Select: 
    * Third-Party > org > source > portable > GCC > ARM_CM4F

### 6.5 Including FreeRTOS.h

**FreeRTOS.h** is a file especific for a specific project.

**FreeRTOSConfig.h**

In the project directory create a new directory **Config** where we allocate the configuration of our RTOS.
From the freeRTOS source code, get config for our  arhcitecture. Search for stm32f4. For instance, inside the folder CORTEX-M4F_STM32F407ZG-SK. if the family selected is different, look for that family, ex. stm32L5. From that folder copy the file FreeRTOSConfig.h

Since we have a new directory in the workspace for the freeRTOS project, in this case **Config**:
* Select the folder **Config** and go to properties.  
* In **C/C++ Build** uncheck **Exclude resource for build**

Now it's time to include the header file:  
ProjectName > Properties > C/C++ Build > Settings > MCU GCC Compiler > Includes
* Add > Select workspace > Select: 
    * Config


### Aditional Notes

Since the primary approach is based on the "system workbench for STM32 from AC6 tools" (eclipse), I'm trying to take a similar approach using STM32CubeIDE. It is important to take into account that when you select the specific microcontroller, the main code is generated with CubeMX, and HAL libraries can not be avoided.

Finally, to avoid problems with FreeRTOS Kernel V10.4.3 downloaded from the website, I decided to mimic the implementation generated by the CubeMx using FreeRTOS Kernel V10.3.1. In this case, special care has to be taken since the architecture is M33 has secure and non-secure mode. I used only the non-secure mode, so only this folder has to be included in the project.

Another important point is to comment in file stm32l5xx_it.c (automatically generated for the Interrupt Service Routines) all the section "Cortex Processor Interruption and Exception Handlers" since FreeRTOS will handle this implementation. 
 



